feat: what is a top layer article draft (#3444)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/blog/what-is-the-top-layer/index.md

---
layout: "layouts/blog-post.njk"
title: "What's a \"Top layer\"?"

> description: "With new native components and APIs coming to the platform, what is this \"Top layer\" that they enable us to use?"

Reviewer: Please don't use native as per style guide. I'd suggest rewording as, "This post explains the "Top Layer" used in some new components and APIs."

Author: Yeah, I missed this in my edit, should say "built-in".

authors:
  - jheyy
hero: "image/Dyx9FwYgMyNqy1kMGx8Orz6q0qC3/kogMUEiTkiI5gKqaxrsJ.jpg"

> alt: "Image of layered mountains"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
alt: "Layered mountains."
```

tags:
  - css
  - html

> date: 2022-08-14

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2022-08-15
```

---

> To cut a long story short, the top layer sits above its related `document` in the browser viewport. And each document has one associated top layer. Thus, elements promoted to the top layer needn't worry about `z-index` or DOM hierarchy. They also get a neat `::backdrop` pseudo-element to play with. The [Fullscreen API](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#new-stacking-layer) spec goes further in-depth on this. And [that API](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Element/requestFullScreen) was a great example of the top layer in use before `dialog` [support came](https://caniuse.com/dialog) along.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The top layer sits above its related `document` in the browser viewport, and each document has one associated top layer. This means that elements promoted to the top layer needn't worry about `z-index` or DOM hierarchy. They also get a neat `::backdrop` pseudo-element to play with. The [Fullscreen API](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#new-stacking-layer) spec goes into more details as [Fullscreen](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Element/requestFullScreen) was a great example of the top layer in use before [`dialog` support](https://caniuse.com/dialog) came along.
```

The important things to remember:
- Top layer is outside of the `document` flow.
- `z-index` has no effect in the top layer.
- Each element in the top layer has a styleable `::backdrop` pseudo-element.
- Each element and `::backdrop` generates a new stacking context.
- Elements in the top layer are stacked in the order they appear in the set. The last one in, appears on top. If you want to promote an element, remove it, and add it again.

How have we mimicked the top layer until now? Well, it's not uncommon to see developers dropping an empty container element at the end of the `body`. And then this will get used as a "faux" top layer. The idea is that this container gets positioned above everything else in the stack. When you want to promote something above everything else, you append it to that container. We can see this in popular packages like [SweetAlert](https://github.com/t4t5/sweetalert), [reactjs-popup](https://github.com/yjose/reactjs-popup), [Magnific Popup](https://github.com/dimsemenov/Magnific-Popup), and others. 

{% Codepen {
    user: 'web-dot-dev',
    id: 'xxWYaor',
    height: 450,
    tab: 'result'
  }
%}

> But, with new native components and APIs like `dialog` and `pop-up`. Developers won't need to resort to these workarounds. We can promote content to the top layer. UI frameworks allow us to co-locate promoted elements with their component counterparts. But, then often get separated in the DOM when it comes to rendering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With new components and APIs like `dialog` and `pop-up`, you won't need to resort to these workarounds. You can promote content to the top layer. 

UI frameworks allow us to co-locate promoted elements with their component counterparts. But, they often get separated in the DOM when it comes to rendering.
```

> By using the top layer, promoted elements are where we put them in our source code (for example, a `dialog`). It doesn't matter how many layers down in the DOM the element is. It will get promoted to the top layer and we can inspect it where we expect it to be, co-located with our component HTML. This makes it easier to inspect both the trigger element and the promoted element in the DOM at the same time. Particularly useful if your trigger element is making attribute updates, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using the top layer, promoted elements are where you put them in your source code (for example, a `dialog`). It doesn't matter how many layers down in the DOM the element is. It will get promoted to the top layer and you can inspect it where you expect it to be, co-located with your component HTML. This makes it easier to inspect both the trigger element and the promoted element in the DOM at the same time. Particularly useful if your trigger element is making attribute updates, for example.
```

---
layout: "layouts/blog-post.njk"
title: "What's a \"Top layer\"?"
description: "With new built-in components and APIs coming to the platform, what is this \"Top layer\" that they enable us to use?"
authors:
  - jheyy
hero: "image/Dyx9FwYgMyNqy1kMGx8Orz6q0qC3/kogMUEiTkiI5gKqaxrsJ.jpg"
alt: "Layered mountains."
tags:
  - css
  - html

> date: 2022-08-15

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2022-08-17
```

> date: 2022-08-17

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2022-08-18
```

---
layout: "layouts/blog-post.njk"
title: "What's a \"Top layer\"?"
description: "With new built-in components and APIs coming to the platform, what is this \"Top layer\" that they enable us to use?"
authors:
  - jheyy
hero: "image/Dyx9FwYgMyNqy1kMGx8Orz6q0qC3/kogMUEiTkiI5gKqaxrsJ.jpg"
alt: "Layered mountains."
tags:
  - css
  - html

> date: 2022-08-18

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2022-08-22
```

The important things to remember:
- Top layer is outside of the `document` flow.
- `z-index` has no effect in the top layer.
- Each element in the top layer has a styleable `::backdrop` pseudo-element.
- Each element and `::backdrop` generates a new stacking context.
- Elements in the top layer are stacked in the order they appear in the set. The last one in, appears on top. If you want to promote an element, remove it, and add it again.

How have we mimicked the top layer until now? Well, it's not uncommon to see developers dropping an empty container element at the end of the `body`. And then this will get used as a "faux" top layer. The idea is that this container gets positioned above everything else in the stack. When you want to promote something above everything else, you append it to that container. We can see this in popular packages like [SweetAlert](https://github.com/t4t5/sweetalert), [reactjs-popup](https://github.com/yjose/reactjs-popup), [Magnific Popup](https://github.com/dimsemenov/Magnific-Popup), and others. 

{% Codepen {
    user: 'web-dot-dev',
    id: 'xxWYaor',
    height: 450,
    tab: 'result'
  }
%}

> With new built-in components and APIs like `dialog` and `pop-up`, you won't need to resort to these workarounds. You can promote content to the top layer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With new built-in components and APIs like `<dialog>` and [`<pop-up>`](https://open-ui.org/components/popup.research.explainer), you won't need to resort to these workarounds. You can promote content to the top layer. 
```

UI frameworks allow us to co-locate promoted elements with their component counterparts. But, they often get separated in the DOM when it comes to rendering.

> By using the top layer, promoted elements are where you put them in your source code (for example, a `dialog`). It doesn't matter how many layers down in the DOM the element is. It will get promoted to the top layer and you can inspect it where you expect it to be, co-located with your component HTML. This makes it easier to inspect both the trigger element and the promoted element in the DOM at the same time. Particularly useful if your trigger element is making attribute updates, for example. This also has an added benefit for accessibility now that the elements are co-located.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using the top layer, promoted elements are where you put them in your source code (for example, a `<dialog>`). It doesn't matter how many layers down in the DOM the element is. It will get promoted to the top layer and you can inspect it where you expect it to be, co-located with your component HTML. This makes it easier to inspect both the trigger element and the promoted element in the DOM at the same time. Particularly useful if your trigger element is making attribute updates, for example. This also has an added benefit for accessibility now that the elements are co-located.
```

{% Codepen {
    user: 'web-dot-dev',
    id: 'QWmQVzX',
    height: 450,
    tab: 'result'
  }
%}

To illustrate the top layer versus high `z-index`, consider this demo.

{% Codepen {
    user: 'web-dot-dev',
    id: 'MWVxmKK',
    height: 450,
    tab: 'result'
  }
%}

> In this demo, you can open a SweetAlert popup and also open a top layer `Dialog`. Open the `Dialog`, and then try opening the SweetAlert popup. You'll see that it appears underneath our top layer element. And the root of our SweetAlert popup is using a `z-index` of 10000 with `position: fixed`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this demo, you can open a SweetAlert popup and also open a top layer `<dialog>`. Open the `<dialog>`, and then try opening the SweetAlert popup. You'll see that it appears underneath our top layer element. And the root of our SweetAlert popup is using a `z-index` of 10000 with `position: fixed`.
```

```css
.swal-overlay {
  z-index: 10000;
  position: fixed;
}
```

> You don't need to apply any styles to the `Dialog` to make it appear above all other content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't need to apply any styles to the `<dialog>` to make it appear above all other content.
```
